## Team Name: Grocery Guardians

## Web App Link: https://grocery-guardians-442.web.app

## Team Members:

- Diana Tran - Dev
- Militha Madur - PM
- Mercedes Ro - Designer
- Sonia Yeh - Dev

## Mission Statement:

Our goal is to eradicate food insecurity by fostering food systems and educating communities on nutritional resources.

## Problem statement:
### Impact:
In Seattle, residents are facing significant challenges in keeping up with the rising food prices and many are struggling to afford groceries. High food inflation is affecting people across the income spectrum. Although higher income individuals do have better selection of produce and grocery options, Seattle metro area households still spend an average of $289 per week on groceries, while the national average is only $270 [1] as Seattle food costs are among the highest in the country. This translates to at least $1,150 a month. At the other end, low income individuals are facing the greatest pressure with many of them struggling to stretch food budgets by cutting back on meals, seeking aid from local and government resources, such as food banks, and buying cheaper processed foods.  With numerous grocery stores and varying prices, it can be time-consuming and difficult for consumers to compare prices and make informed purchasing decisions. This often leads to overspending on groceries and increased strain on household budgets, which perpetuate food insecurity pressures especially in an area with a high cost of living.

The impact of rising food prices is that a much greater number of people are facing food insecurity and the resulting detrimental effects of health issues and economic strain. While food insecurity can be caused by poverty, food insecurity can also cause poverty, which can lead people to get trapped in food insecurity cycles due to their financial status. In King County,  “an estimated 10.5 percent of people (roughly 243,000) experience food insecurity”, and “food insecure adults and children are more likely to experience poor physical, oral, and mental health than food secure people” [2]. Food insecurity has significant consequences on a person’s physical health as it increases the risk of chronic illnesses, such as diabetes and heart disease. Oftentimes, the increased cost of food leaves many individuals with no choice but to purchase less expensive and less nutritious foods, leading to negative health outcomes. Additionally, the increased costs can take up a large amount of the budgets of lower income households, leaving less allocation towards better healthcare or education.

### Quantified Scope:
The City of Seattle has a population of 737,015 as of 2020 [3]. According to the most recent Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Report (2018-2021) conducted by the King County, 10.3% of adults reported that they experienced food insecurity [4]. Areas impacted by racial and socioeconomic injustices experience the highest food insecurity. In particular, households in Southeast Seattle neighborhoods of South Beacon Hill, Georgetown, and South Park have an average food insecurity rate of 26.5%, with some areas experiencing food insecurity rates as high as 40.8% [4]. Rainier Valley and Rainier Beach neighborhoods had a food insecurity rate of 17.9%, while downtown Seattle, Belltown, and First Hill areas had a food insecurity rate of 13.2% [4]. Local surveys have found that Black and Hispanic/Latinx households are twice as likely to experience food insecurity than white households, with rates ranging from 26.6-32.4% [4]. Approximately 6 in 10 homes in Seattle are located within 0.5 miles of a grocery store, but some neighborhoods in low-income areas, such as South Park, Riverview, High Point, and Highland Park do not have access to a grocery store [5] . 

### Causes:
Several factors that may be contributing to this might be the disruptions and high demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The OECD states that “COVID-19 is also likely to lead to higher food prices in the developing world due to disruptions to logistics” [6]. The price of increased manufacturing and shipping food is likely offset to customers when purchasing goods from grocery stores. In addition to COVID-19, international conflicts, animal disease, plant disease, and other factors occurring simultaneously may be contributing to the increasing food prices [7]. Climate change and extreme heat has resulted in droughts that have reduced the amount of fruit and vegetable crops and crops used to feed livestock, driving up the cost of fresh produce and meat. 

One of the most direct contributing causes of food insecurity is having a low income. Seattle residents face annual expenditures that are higher than the national average of $70,052 [8]. In 2021 to 2022, the average annual expenditure of Seattle residents was $93,905 with 11.2% consisting only of food costs [8]. This means that on average Seattle residents are paying approximately $1,700 more on food, which is a substantial part of many people’s household budgets that could be going towards other necessities. Living in areas with high costs of living increases the financial burden, with those who have a low income feeling the greatest pressure, increasing the likelihood of experiencing food insecurity.

### Existing Solutions:
Some of the existing solutions such as food assistance programs and local food production fall short due to their limitations. Food assistance programs provide some support towards offsetting the effects of high food costs, but are not sufficient enough to cover the full extent of Seattle’s cost of living due to various reasons, one of them being expiring benefits [9]. Hopelink is a community organization that operates five food markets and a mobile market in King County [1]. In January 2024, Hopelink served 8,821 people at the markets, which is 14% higher than the number of people served in August 2023 [1]. More and more people are seeking and need access to these services. However, the program currently has a $600,000 funding gap for the current fiscal year since the federal stimulus money after COVID has expired [1]. Not every individual who is eligible for government food assistance programs uses them. This is because of  barriers in application requirements, such as proof of income, immigration status, and feeling shame or embarrassment for needing/using these programs. Additionally, local food production is limited by their reach, since access to vendors like local farmer’s markets might be out of reach for many individuals and the supply is limited compared to larger farms and outsourced crops.


### Citations:
- [1] Whitman, Victor. “Can’t Keep up with Seattle-Area Rising Food Prices? You’re Not Alone.” The Seattle Times, The Seattle Times Company, 11 May 2024, www.seattletimes.com/business/cant-keep-up-with-seattle-area-rising-food-prices-youre-not-alone/#:~:text=In%202022%2C%20prices%20in%20the,Labor%20Statistics%20Consumer%20Price%20Index. 
- [2] “Food Insecurity in King County.” Food Insecurity in King County, Published February 2023, King County, Feb. 2023, cdn.kingcounty.gov/-/media/king-county/depts/dph/documents/health-safety/health-programs-services/healthy-eating-active-living/food-insecurity-report-feb-2023.pdf?rev=b132206f6cef42c68df44968a98a9934&hash=3834414AA1F732274498069A764D3CD8. 
- [3] City of Seattle, and U.S. Census Bureau. “About Seattle.” About Seattle - OPCD, 12 Aug. 2021, www.seattle.gov/opcd/population-and-demographics/about-seattle. 
- [4] “Food Insecurity.” Race and Social Justice Initiative (RSJI), City of Seattle, 2021, www.seattle.gov/rsji/racial-equity-research/food-insecurity. 
- [5] “Equitable Development Community Indicators Report.” Equitable Development Monitoring Program, City of Seattle Office of Planning and Community Development, Sept. 2020, www.seattle.gov/Documents/Departments/OPCD/Demographics/CommunityIndicatorsReport2020.pdf. 
- [6] Food Supply Chains and COVID-19: Impacts and Policy Lessons, OECD, June 2020, read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=134_134305-ybqvdf0kg9&title=Food-Supply-Chains-and-COVID-19-Impacts-and-policy-lessons. 
- [7] Food Prices: Information on Trends, Factors, and Federal Roles , U.S. Government Accountability Office, 11 Apr. 2023, www.gao.gov/products/gao-23-105846.  
- [8] Consumer Expenditures in the Seattle Metropolitan Area - 2021–22 : Western Information Office, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 19 Oct. 2023, www.bls.gov/regions/west/news-release/ConsumerExpenditures_Seattle.htm. 
- [9]  “Low-Income Washington State Households Still Struggling with Food Insecurity as Pandemic Protections End.” UW School of Public Health, 22 Feb. 2023, sph.washington.edu/news-events/sph-blog/food-insecurity-as-pandemic-protections-end.
- [10] “Goal 2 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs.” The Sustainable Development Goals , United Nations, sdgs.un.org/goals/goal2 
